README.md, before:

lol-re
======

Tiny wrapper around CL-PPCRE, making usage of regexps more perly.
Inspired by let-over-lambda's #~m and #~s read-macro (http://www.letoverlambda.com)

This package introduces two car-reader-macro (see CL-READ-MACRO-TOKENS) M~ and S~.
M~ is for matching, while S~ is for substitution
(in direct analogy with Perl's '=~ m//' and ' =~ s///' idioms).

M~
--

Syntax:

*m~* regexp [string]
=> function | (or null string)

Basic example:

```lisp
(with-open-file (out-file "out-file" :direction :output)
  (iter (for line in-file "in-file" using #'readline)
        (and (m~ "(some)regexp(?<with>with)grouping(s)" line)
             ;; plenty of anaphoric bindings are available after the match
             (format out-file #?"$($1) $($2) $($with) $($3)"))))
```

First argument of M~ is read in with reader of #?r" installed
for ". Thus, you don't have to escape backslashes, appearing
in front of regexp-meaning characters.
Unfortunately, interpolation is not supported for now.
Only double quotes are chosen as a delimiter, as otherwise
 lisp-mode of Emacs would go crazy when seeing something like this: /"/

When called with one argument (regexp), M~ expands into closure, which
accepts string. When called with same string repeatedly, it outputs
subsequent matches of the regexp on that string.

```lisp
LOL-RE> (defparameter matcher (m~ "[a-z]"))
LOL-RE> (funcall matcher "asdf")
"a"
LOL-RE> (funcall matcher "asdf")
"s"
LOL-RE> (funcall matcher "asdf")
"d"
LOL-RE> (funcall matcher "asdf")
"f"
LOL-RE> (funcall matcher "asdf")
NIL
```

When called with different strings, behavior may be strange.

```lisp
LOL-RE> (defparameter matcher (m~ "[a-z]"))
LOL-RE> (funcall matcher "foo")
"f"
LOL-RE> (funcall matcher "bar") ; matching starts from the position, where first match finished
"a"
```

However, when called with :RESET keyword, the position counter inside the closure
is reset, so closure can be called now on some new string.

```lisp
LOL-RE> (defparameter matcher (m~ "[a-z]"))
LOL-RE> (funcall matcher "foo")
"f"
LOL-RE> (funcall matcher :reset)
T
LOL-RE> (funcall matcher "bar")
"b"
```

When called with two arguments (regexp and string), M~ expands into
application of a matching closure to that string, so the first match
of regexp on that string.

```lisp
LOL-RE> (m~ "[0-9]+" "foo123bar456")
"123"
```

M~ also sets some anaphoric bindings (as seen in the basic example):
  * $0 is the whole match, $-0 and $+0 are the beginning and the end positions of whole match
  * $1 is the first group, $-1 and $+1 are the beginning and the end of the first group
  * ... and so on for all other groups
  * if a group was *named*, say, "foo", then also variables $FOO, $-FOO and $+FOO, with
    similar meaning. When generating symbol-name case of register is reversed, so
    for register named "fOo" symbols would be $|FoO|, $-|FoO| and $+|FoO|.

Since all those anaphoric bindings are (by default) global dynamic variables
  * they are equal to the ones relevant for the latest (in physical time) match performed.
  * this may be tricky when multithreading, but see RE-LOCAL macro below

Iterate drivers
---------------

System also defines two drivers for iterate: IN-MATCHES-OF and MATCHING

```lisp
(iter (for match in-matches-of "asdf" using (m~ "[a-z]([a-z])"))
      (collect `(,match ,$0 ,$1)))
(("as" "as" "s") ("df" "df" "f"))
```
As seen from the example, IN-MATCHES-OF iterates over all
matches of given regexp in a given string. Both string and regexp
are evaluated once-only, in the initialization of the loop.

In contrast, first example could be rewritten using MATCHING driver as follows:

```lisp
(with-open-file (out-file "out-file" :direction :output)
  (iter (for line in-file "in-file" using #'readline)
        (for match matching line using (m~ "(some)regexp(?<with>with)grouping(s)"))
	(format out-file #?"$($1) $($2) $($with) $($3)")))
```
but there are couple important things, which MATCHING does differently:
  * regexp is evaluated once-only, before the loop starts
  * even if the line didn't match regexp, FORMAT is still executed, printing line of NILs

So, MATCHING is more-or-less analogous to
```lisp
(let ((matcher (m~ "(some)regexp(?<with>with)grouping(s)")))
  (with-open-file (out-file "out-file" :direction :output)
    (iter (for line in-file "in-file" using #'readline)
          (funcall matcher line)
          (format out-file #?"$($1) $($2) $($with) $($3)"))))
```

TODO:
  * (done) creation of scanner, when regex-spec is just plain string
  * (wont do) do all the expansion at read-time, so that ((m~ "asdf") str) syntax be possible
  * usage of cl-interpol strings as regex-spec
  * (done) list of strings instead of just one string (auto joining)
  * ability to turn off some anaphoric bindings
  * (done) convenient iterate macros
    * (done) for iterating over all matches within a given string
    * (done) for iterating over multiple strings with the same regexp
  * ability to use only #?r syntax on implementations not supported by CL-READ-MACRO-TOKENS

For more usage patterns, see tests.lisp file and use-cases.lisp.
use-cases.lisp was assembled by grepping of some quicklisp-available libs
and rewriting CL-PPCRE-using pieces with help of M~ and S~.

S~
--

For now, replacing only can replace first occurence of the match.
But, still, it's not needed to escape all those backslashes.

```lisp
LOL-RE> (s~ "(\d{4})-(\d{2})-(\d{2})" "\3/\2/\1" "2014-04-07")
07/04/2014
```

When called with just 2 arguments, generates replacer closure

```lisp
LOL-RE> (funcall (s~ "(\d{4})-(\d{2})-(\d{2})" "\3/\2/\1") "2014-04-07")
07/04/2014
```


TODO:
  * (done) creation of substituter, both target and replacement are plain strings, no named groups allowed
  * named groups are allowed in target
  * named groups are also allowed in replacement
  * cl-interpol #?r strings
  * lists are allowed instead of plain strings
  * G symbol switch to do all possible replacements


re-local
--------

The purpose of this macro is to tackle issues, that arise when multithreading.

```lisp
(re-local (all-the-variables like $1 $2 $a)
          (arising-from-use-of-m~)
          (are-declared-local-special)
          (inside-re-local))
```

So
```lisp
;; this is not thread-safe, as some other thread may corrupt $1 before PRINC gets executed
(and (m~ "foo(bar)") (princ $1))
```

But
```lisp
;; this is (supposedly) thread-safe, as all the relevant variables are implicitly
(re-local (and (m~ "foo(bar)") (princ $1)))
```

How it works: codewalks (with help of HU.DWIM.WALKER) the body, with M~ and S~
redefined as MACROLETs, with same expansion, but with side-effect
of telling RE-LOCAL, what variables they are going to initialize.

N.B.: If M~ was to be defined fully as read-time macro,
 then it's not possible to write RE-LOCAL even using code-walking,
since it's not possible (read: very hard and ugly) to read the form twice from a stream.
So, I won't define M~ to be read-time macro, at cost of sometimes being required to write FUNCALL.

Gotchas
-------

* potential racing conditions when multithreading (but, read re-local section)

Commit message:

Fix comment in RE-LOCAL example

README.md, after:

lol-re
======

Tiny wrapper around CL-PPCRE, making usage of regexps more perly.
Inspired by let-over-lambda's #~m and #~s read-macro (http://www.letoverlambda.com)

This package introduces two car-reader-macro (see CL-READ-MACRO-TOKENS) M~ and S~.
M~ is for matching, while S~ is for substitution
(in direct analogy with Perl's '=~ m//' and ' =~ s///' idioms).

M~
--

Syntax:

*m~* regexp [string]
=> function | (or null string)

Basic example:

```lisp
(with-open-file (out-file "out-file" :direction :output)
  (iter (for line in-file "in-file" using #'readline)
        (and (m~ "(some)regexp(?<with>with)grouping(s)" line)
             ;; plenty of anaphoric bindings are available after the match
             (format out-file #?"$($1) $($2) $($with) $($3)"))))
```

First argument of M~ is read in with reader of #?r" installed
for ". Thus, you don't have to escape backslashes, appearing
in front of regexp-meaning characters.
Unfortunately, interpolation is not supported for now.
Only double quotes are chosen as a delimiter, as otherwise
 lisp-mode of Emacs would go crazy when seeing something like this: /"/

When called with one argument (regexp), M~ expands into closure, which
accepts string. When called with same string repeatedly, it outputs
subsequent matches of the regexp on that string.

```lisp
LOL-RE> (defparameter matcher (m~ "[a-z]"))
LOL-RE> (funcall matcher "asdf")
"a"
LOL-RE> (funcall matcher "asdf")
"s"
LOL-RE> (funcall matcher "asdf")
"d"
LOL-RE> (funcall matcher "asdf")
"f"
LOL-RE> (funcall matcher "asdf")
NIL
```

When called with different strings, behavior may be strange.

```lisp
LOL-RE> (defparameter matcher (m~ "[a-z]"))
LOL-RE> (funcall matcher "foo")
"f"
LOL-RE> (funcall matcher "bar") ; matching starts from the position, where first match finished
"a"
```

However, when called with :RESET keyword, the position counter inside the closure
is reset, so closure can be called now on some new string.

```lisp
LOL-RE> (defparameter matcher (m~ "[a-z]"))
LOL-RE> (funcall matcher "foo")
"f"
LOL-RE> (funcall matcher :reset)
T
LOL-RE> (funcall matcher "bar")
"b"
```

When called with two arguments (regexp and string), M~ expands into
application of a matching closure to that string, so the first match
of regexp on that string.

```lisp
LOL-RE> (m~ "[0-9]+" "foo123bar456")
"123"
```

M~ also sets some anaphoric bindings (as seen in the basic example):
  * $0 is the whole match, $-0 and $+0 are the beginning and the end positions of whole match
  * $1 is the first group, $-1 and $+1 are the beginning and the end of the first group
  * ... and so on for all other groups
  * if a group was *named*, say, "foo", then also variables $FOO, $-FOO and $+FOO, with
    similar meaning. When generating symbol-name case of register is reversed, so
    for register named "fOo" symbols would be $|FoO|, $-|FoO| and $+|FoO|.

Since all those anaphoric bindings are (by default) global dynamic variables
  * they are equal to the ones relevant for the latest (in physical time) match performed.
  * this may be tricky when multithreading, but see RE-LOCAL macro below

Iterate drivers
---------------

System also defines two drivers for iterate: IN-MATCHES-OF and MATCHING

```lisp
(iter (for match in-matches-of "asdf" using (m~ "[a-z]([a-z])"))
      (collect `(,match ,$0 ,$1)))
(("as" "as" "s") ("df" "df" "f"))
```
As seen from the example, IN-MATCHES-OF iterates over all
matches of given regexp in a given string. Both string and regexp
are evaluated once-only, in the initialization of the loop.

In contrast, first example could be rewritten using MATCHING driver as follows:

```lisp
(with-open-file (out-file "out-file" :direction :output)
  (iter (for line in-file "in-file" using #'readline)
        (for match matching line using (m~ "(some)regexp(?<with>with)grouping(s)"))
	(format out-file #?"$($1) $($2) $($with) $($3)")))
```
but there are couple important things, which MATCHING does differently:
  * regexp is evaluated once-only, before the loop starts
  * even if the line didn't match regexp, FORMAT is still executed, printing line of NILs

So, MATCHING is more-or-less analogous to
```lisp
(let ((matcher (m~ "(some)regexp(?<with>with)grouping(s)")))
  (with-open-file (out-file "out-file" :direction :output)
    (iter (for line in-file "in-file" using #'readline)
          (funcall matcher line)
          (format out-file #?"$($1) $($2) $($with) $($3)"))))
```

TODO:
  * (done) creation of scanner, when regex-spec is just plain string
  * (wont do) do all the expansion at read-time, so that ((m~ "asdf") str) syntax be possible
  * usage of cl-interpol strings as regex-spec
  * (done) list of strings instead of just one string (auto joining)
  * ability to turn off some anaphoric bindings
  * (done) convenient iterate macros
    * (done) for iterating over all matches within a given string
    * (done) for iterating over multiple strings with the same regexp
  * ability to use only #?r syntax on implementations not supported by CL-READ-MACRO-TOKENS

For more usage patterns, see tests.lisp file and use-cases.lisp.
use-cases.lisp was assembled by grepping of some quicklisp-available libs
and rewriting CL-PPCRE-using pieces with help of M~ and S~.

S~
--

For now, replacing only can replace first occurence of the match.
But, still, it's not needed to escape all those backslashes.

```lisp
LOL-RE> (s~ "(\d{4})-(\d{2})-(\d{2})" "\3/\2/\1" "2014-04-07")
07/04/2014
```

When called with just 2 arguments, generates replacer closure

```lisp
LOL-RE> (funcall (s~ "(\d{4})-(\d{2})-(\d{2})" "\3/\2/\1") "2014-04-07")
07/04/2014
```


TODO:
  * (done) creation of substituter, both target and replacement are plain strings, no named groups allowed
  * named groups are allowed in target
  * named groups are also allowed in replacement
  * cl-interpol #?r strings
  * lists are allowed instead of plain strings
  * G symbol switch to do all possible replacements


re-local
--------

The purpose of this macro is to tackle issues, that arise when multithreading.

```lisp
(re-local (all-the-variables like $1 $2 $a)
          (arising-from-use-of-m~)
          (are-declared-local-special)
          (inside-re-local))
```

So
```lisp
;; this is not thread-safe, as some other thread may corrupt $1 before PRINC gets executed
(and (m~ "foo(bar)") (princ $1))
```

But
```lisp
;; this is (supposedly) thread-safe, as all the relevant variables are implicitly
;; rebound as local dynamic, which are per-thread
(re-local (and (m~ "foo(bar)") (princ $1)))
```

How it works: codewalks (with help of HU.DWIM.WALKER) the body, with M~ and S~
redefined as MACROLETs, with same expansion, but with side-effect
of telling RE-LOCAL, what variables they are going to initialize.

N.B.: If M~ was to be defined fully as read-time macro,
 then it's not possible to write RE-LOCAL even using code-walking,
since it's not possible (read: very hard and ugly) to read the form twice from a stream.
So, I won't define M~ to be read-time macro, at cost of sometimes being required to write FUNCALL.

Gotchas
-------

* potential racing conditions when multithreading (but, read re-local section)
